Introducing Django

This is a short introduction to the Django framework. Django is a web development framework written in Python, and its aim is to be versatile. It's capable of building any application you might envision, but it's also performant and convenient. You'll build applications quickly, and they'll run quickly as well. Now, Django is also a very complete framework. Out of the books, it contains everything you need to build any web application. It has its own HTML template language, a beautiful ORM framework for storing your data in a database, sessions, authentication, internationalization, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So, let's go ahead now and see what a Django project looks like. Now, the project we'll be building is a digital Scrum board, which allows us to create a list of cards for tasks to be carried out by a Scrum team. Again, don't worry about understanding every detail, because I'll go over this step by step in the next modules. Now, what I want to focus on are the various components that make up a Django application. Mainly, the following three types of components: models, templates, and views. And these three types of components together make up the architecture that's central to Django, which is aptly called model template view, or MTV, for short. Let me start by showing you our end product. This is the application we're going to build. It shows you a list of Scrum cards, and I can interact with these cards by clicking on them, maybe deleting them or changing their title, or moving them to another list. Of course, you can also add new cards, and if I click this button here, there's even the possibility of sorting and filtering cards. Now, let's talk a little bit about the architecture of this application, so that you understand the structure of what we're going to build. Django has a model template view architecture. And what you see here is our card model. This is a Python class that we use to store our data in the database, and as you can see, it holds all the properties that a card has: a title, a description, story points, et cetera, et cetera. Now, of course, our goal is to show this data in the browser, and the component that handles a request from the browser is called a view. So, this, for example, is a very simple Django view. It's called helloworld, and it has a parameter called request. So it will handle requests from a browser. Now, what this really simple view does is two things. First, it retrieves data from the database. Here, it says, Card.objects.count, and that means that we're retrieving from the database the number of cards that's stored there. Then, to show that data to a user, we use a so-called template, helloworld.html. And that's basically what a view does. It accepts an incoming request from the browser, does some logic, maybe storing or retrieving database data or doing calculations or anything you want to do, and then it sends any data it wants to show to the user to a template to be displayed in an HTML page. So here, we have the helloworld.html template. And, basically, this is just an HTML page with some Django-specific code. As you can see here, it's a classic hello, world page. It says, hi, this is a simple hello, world template. But it has something more. It also says, you currently have count Scrum cards. And this here is a Django-specific piece of syntax which will display the count we just retrieved from the database in the view. And then there's always an important fourth step, and that is to assign a URL to a view. So here's a very simple URL configuration that maps the URL hellworld to our view, views.helloworld, which we just saw. And that means if I type hello, world here in the URL bar, we now see the page that's generated by our view and template. And it tells me I currently have 11 Scrum cards in the database. So, to show you this model template view architecture in a very schematic way, let's say you visit a page in the browser. What happens is, the browser sends an HTTP GET request to the server. In our case, this will be a Django server. So now, to handle this request, Django will take a number of steps. First, it will look in its URL configuration, urls.py, to look for a line that maps the requested URL to a view. If it finds one, and in our case, it will find our helloworld view, it calls that view. And then it's up to the view to decide what to do. And most HTML pages will simply retrieve some data from the database to show that to the user, or maybe, if they handle a form, they will store or edit some data, and then show an answer to the user. So, the view will call the model to retrieve or save some data. And, finally, when it has collected all the data it wants to show, it sends the data to the template, and the template, then, generates a nice HTML page, which is then sent back to the browser. And, finally, when that HTML page is sent to the browser, the page will be shown to the user.
